(upbeat techno music)
I decided it was time to take a crash course
in the history of money and economics
to understand what's happening
to out global economies right now.
Luckily, I came across just that,
the crash course by Chris Martenson.
It's a free online course on the history
of money and debt in the U.S.
that should be a mandatory part
of our continuing education.
I found it fascinating to understand
how money and debt is created
and how we've ended up in the inevitable position
we find ourselves in now.
(upbeat techno music)
Chris, personally I want to say thank you
for the work you've compiled.
It's amazingly clear.
It helps us understand the whole world
of economies and monies and inflation,
and commodities and everything
in such a crystal clear way
that really anybody can understand it which is great.
You don't have to have your Ph.D.
or Masters in Economics or anything.
So, thank you.
I really appreciate that.
Your welcome.
'Cause you help me understand
some things that had stopped in big question marks.
So we'll encourage anybody that wants to get the basis
for this to go to the site and do the crash course.
But we're just gonna pick it up with some themes
for right now, some of the more contemporary things
that we're dealing with.
It is January 2010, as we're talking,
really interesting times.
Can we start with the whole notion
about money being created?
One of the things you showed on there
that I felt really interesting, fascinated with
was the notion that to create in the U.S.,
to create the first trillion dollars took 300 years.
Now what's it down to?
And let's talk about the implications
of creating money at that rate.
What you're referring to is the fact
that we spent 300 years of our history,
I guess so people came over, landed here on boats,
we fought some wars, we built roads,
we industrialized an entire nation.
We built schools, we went to the moon,
everything we've done that we really can look back
and say, "Wow, look at all that."
That took a trillion dollars of money creation
through all of that time.
That means all of the accumulated wealth
of the nation had approached the limit
of a trillion dollars.
And that was in 1973, '74.
And most recently we've created a trillion dollars
in about four, four-and-a-half months.
And this just reveals something about money.
This is the most amazing thing,
so I went through an entire MBA program
and a bunch of years of business without knowing
the most important thing,
which is how money is created.
They taught me how to scramble for it.
They didn't teach you that?
Nope, they taught me how to manage it,
they taught me all the tricks.
We learned the taxes, accounting,
we learned all of this stuff
which is how you work with money,
but for some reason, they never explained
where it came from.
And that's where the tale is actually
has the most interest and the most import,
and is the thing that we should be paying
the closes attention to, because our money is created
out of thin air, meaning that it's not backed by anything.
There is gold in Fort Knox, but it doesn't back a dollar.
You can't go down to a bank and exchange a dollar
for anything except a dollar.
And it's just the most amazing thing
when you can create money out of thin air.
It really should be something that we pay
very close attention to
and that we're really comfortable
that the people who are in control of that process
know what they're doing and are really being
as careful as they can be.
Because, you know, the long story short
there are over 3,800 paper currencies
we can look at in history that have all evaporated,
gone up in flames, gone up in inflationary flames.
And they all do it for the same sets of reasons
which is that it feels like we get a little bit of relief
through a crisis by printing a little bit of money
so that become something that we do
even during non-crisis times.
And then the next crisis comes
and we do it even faster,
and then the next one comes
and it just becomes a part of how we do things.
Yet at the same time,
I was noticing the graph where it talks
about conflict, war, where there's typically
an inflationary period.
It would go up a little bit, maybe from five to 10%,
five to 8% historically in the various wars,
and again, we're keeping this to the United States history.
But then it would level back down again
where it was previously,
but that's not what we're talking about now.
No, inflation used to be a temporary phenomenon.
We would have bouts of inflation
that were always associated with wars.
And wars are inflationary because what happens is
the government creates a whole lot of extra money
to pay for the war.
And war has this double whammy associated with it
because the goods and services that we create and produce
for war, we destroy them in the conflict of that war.
Like bombs.
Bombs, right, so you build a bomb, cost $100,000
and then you go and you blow it up.
Well, the bomb's gone, but the $100,000 isn't.
It's still rolling around.
It went to the bomb manufacturer,
but guess what?
It went into their funds and out it went,
and so wars tend to be highly inflationary.
We know this.
And they're highly inflationary
because governments overspend,
overspend relative to the economy.
Now, we can fast forward to today,
yes, we are fighting two wars,
and, you know, these are gonna be inflationary,
but we're also fighting now the equivalent
of an economic war.
And we are creating money again as if we were at war,
but we're not, really, in this case,
we're just creating money because we're in a crisis,
because this is what we do now,
because it's our first big lever that we pull
when we get into this sort of crisis territory.
So the amount of money that we are creating right now
is so far in excess of what our economy needs
or what it can sustain, so far beyond the production
of goods and services that it's pretty much a guarantee
at this point that that money
is gonna come back and haunt us.
And, you know, how would you detect that?
It's gonna be rising prices.
Now, remember, inflation is a symptom.
But the cause, why did the prices go up?
What caused that?
That was money.
The money system itself, overproducing money,
that's the key thing.
So we should all be looking at that.
Don't worry about, you know, has toilet paper doubled
in price, that's interesting, and you can use that
as a canary, but we're interested in the gas and the mine,
not the fact that the canary died.
This is something anybody who cares to,
luckily we live in a free and open society,
we publish all the statistics, and anybody who wants to
can go to the Federal Reserve website,
look it up, and oh my gosh,
it's all there in black and white.
We are dumping money into the ether
as fast as we possibly can.
It's astounding.
Well, and as you said,
it would be okay if we had people
that we trusted at the helm doing this,
in a, you know, essentially, a very ordered fashioned
for a specific purpose.
But we're way beyond that now.
It's not only being done in a disorganized way,
I'm convinced it's being done in a criminal way.
People who are in power right now,
there's a revolving door,
we've noticed this for a long time.
People come out of Wall Street and they go
to the Treasury Department, and they come out of there
and they go back to Wall Street, and sometimes they go
to the CIA, and then they come out of there
and they go to the State Department.
And so there's been this revolving door
between the money center powers
and the government powers and it's been going on
long enough that I feel like they've lost any sense
of direction, that they've been telling themselves
the same stories long enough that they have a story
that works for them, but it's not our story any more,
it's really a story of special interests and of power
and of, you know, lots of history and baggage
between all the various players.
And, frankly, at this point, the criminal aspect
I referred to it was flat out obvious to me
when Hank Paulson came to Congress
for the original $750 billion of TARP money,
and he said, "Only three conditions:
"I'm not gonna tell you who I'm giving it to,
"you can't review any of my actions
"and I'm not gonna be criminally liable
"at any point in the future."
What?
And can't, big can't, red flag,
that's just amazing.
And yet, why, I mean, that's a whole other subject.
That people don't seem to be,
the average person, like us, we don't seem to be really,
you know, taking up banners and camping out
on the steps of the Capitol or Federal Reserve.
In fact, there's never anyone at the Federal Reserve.
We went there recently to check
and one little guard at the door with a little gun.
We said, "Where is everybody?"
They said, "Well, look where we are,
"it's kind of off the Wall Street path."
And we said, "No, you wouldn't want to advertise
"this place, would you?"
They said, "Well, that's true, no neon lights."
But why are we, why are the people not doing anything?
It has to be because we're really not
very well informed about this.
Well being better informed should be
a part of the equation.
But another thing is
that people are doing things all the time.
I truly believe it's not well advertised.
So we had a Tea Party movement that went through,
and I think that almost two million people showed up,
and that's an enormous quantity of people.
Actually, you're right, that is true.
And it was largely marginalized,
and they found some whack-a-doodles in the audience,
and it was sort of painted in a certain way,
and that was unforturnate, but...
I have been finding in my work
that more and more people get it,
many people are quite outraged at this point in time.
But we don't really have an effective way of organizing yet.
That's true.
In this country, so that our power,
our anger and power can turn into something
that's easily recognized.
That is true.
We've really been marginalized,
but I'll say this, when my father was raising me,
he was a single income person
and now you need at least two incomes
to manage most families.
And so that just pulls all of our time away.
And we had a contract, we had a bargain.
The bargain was we were gonna live our lives
doing what we do out here
in, you know, where real people live,
and in Washington, they were gonna to do what they do.
And hopefully we were both
gonna keep up our ends of the bargain.
I feel like Washington has broken the bargain
with the people.
And so it's gonna take a little time for us
to wake back up and pull that responsibility back in
and say, "Well, listen, we trusted you and we gave you
"we passed our responsibility over to you
"to manage things well, and you're not doing that
"good of a job, so it's time to start pulling that back."
But that's going to be a long process, I believe.
Yeah, and I didn't mean for you
to go on aside of social action, which we have here,
but all those are points well taken.
Let's go back to where we were before.
Now, let's look at just some of the criminal aspects
of at least the moral aspects of what has happened
in the banking industry, before we go
into the housing bubble and such.
And what are the ramifications of what has occurred
so far with the bailouts?
I mean, we read the headlines about the bonuses
for the top execs and so forth, and we're angry,
but we don't really, I mean, our banks haven't folded up,
we're not really seeing where this is playing out,
except that we're not being extended credit, we do see that.
But what are the total effects
that you can see of what's happened?
So the first thing is that I believe
that the trillions of dollars we've given
to the bankers is wasted money.
And this isn't a new concept.
I think it was John Stuart Mills in 1876 said,
"Financial panics do not destroy capital,
"they merely reveal the extent to which
"it's been previously betrayed into unproductive works."
Hmm.
So the banks already destroyed the capital.
It's already gone.
The mortgages that are upside down,
those are not ever gonna have value
that's gonna anything approach
a hundred cents on the dollar again.
All of the derivative structures
they layered on top of that, that's gone.
They've played around, they gambled, they lost.
Now, the reason that we're not seeing more banks folding
at this point is that the government in March of 2009
allowed banks to hide things on their balance sheets.
They allowed them to just sweep it off
and say, "Put it over there, and you don't have to account
"for it, you don't have to market to market,
"and you don't have to tell us the true value."
And so they did that, and then they took
all this bailout money, and the very first thing they did
with it is they said, "Well since we can exclude and ignore
"all these losses we were really profitable."
And they gave themselves record bonuses.
I know it's just so painful.
Which reminds me of that story
about the scorpion and the frog, you know,
and the frog carries the scorpion across the water,
but the scorpion stings it and they both drown,
and the frog says, "Why did you do that?"
I think he should have said, "Because I'm a banker."
(Regina laughs)
They couldn't help themselves,
I mean, that's what I read in that particular story.
It's a mentality that's just driven
towards self-preservation and greed, really.
Mm-hmm.
And so what is
the pass-down effect been with us?
Well, the pass down that we're gonna be living with this
for a very long time.
This is actually a fairly substantial destruction
of capital that we're gonna be going through for a while.
We're gonna be living with a bursting,
this is the largest credit bubble in all of history.
So, when I look at this, this is actually has
a very simple plot line to me, and it's a very simple story.
So people ask me, "Gosh, very complicated,
"how do I understand this crisis?"
I say, "I can put it in a pamphlet,
"and it would be titled Too Much Debt."
Everything else, the subprimes,
the lending standards, and the regulatory lapses,
and the derivatives and all of that,
those are supporting characters
in a story that really just, it just reads too much debt.
So this is what I was watching and looking at
when I was making some of the very profound moves
in my own life, the reason why I got out of the stock market
a long time ago, much higher prices,
the reason why I knew I wanted to get into gold and silver.
A lot of these things came from one simple observation,
from 2000 to 2008, total credit market debt
in the United States doubled.
It went from 26 trillion to 52 trillion
in eight years.
It doubled, total debt.
And this is, I'm not just saying government debt,
this is government, corporate, state, federal, personal.
So we were all on a debt binge.
And over that same period of time,
no new net jobs were created,
and median wages went backwards.
And I was watching all of this unfold,
and every year it just got larger,
and I said this can't work out.
We all know how debt works,
you pay it back or you default on it.
That's it, there's no other options out there.
So how can you double the total amount of debt
while your jobs and wages
are going backwards or stagnating?
It just didn't add up.
And so this is the trick I use to get through life,
this is how I've been able to make many
of the large decisions in my life,
is I just look at the really, the biggest story I can,
and I say, "Does this make sense?"
If the answer is no, I say,
"Well then, it's probably gonna stop."
And then I just try to figure out when it might stop
and what it would look like when it does,
when the music finally stops.
Not a pretty picture when it stops.
No, no, and this was a global credit bubble.
Alan Greenspan, bless his heart,
he blew the largest bubble in all of history
and this is the real danger in this story,
because, yes, we had the tool or bubble
which impacted a very small part of Holland
in the 1600s and then we had a South Sea bubble,
and that blew up France at one point in time,
and then England, and then we had a railroad bubble
here in this country, but it impacted
a relatively small swath of investors,
but this bubble impacts the whole world.
If you think we had an amazing property bubble
here in America, you should see what happened in Ireland.
And if you think that's bad,
you should see what happened in Spain.
I mean, they just blow us off the charts.
It's just amazing.
And that story hasn't even been told yet.
It's getting told, it's absolutely getting told.
I mean, it's still to be revealed
in terms of true numbers and such
over the next few years, right?
Oh, absolutely.
If we're gonna be totally honest.
Accounting isn't honest
so we don't exactly where we are.
No, no, if we look at the total credit bubble,
where we said we went from 26 trillion to 52 trillion,
and we think of it as a bubble,
all bubbles have this habit of being very symmetrical.
So they start at a point and they rise,
and then they burst and they tend to go back
to where they started from.
So if we apply that logic to the credit bubble
that says we started at 26, we went to 52,
and that's gonna have to retrace,
which means we have $26 trillion of evaporation
that needs to happen in our debt markets.
It's a huge number.
How's that happen besides defaults?
It only happens through defaults,
or paying it back.
But it can't.
There's no way to pay back that amount of money
out of our productive economy.
It would, we would be in permanent recession,
or depression and that means you can't pay anything back.
So, it's really a, it's quite a conundrum,
so I think happens through a process of default,
and that's what should be happening.
The people who,
here's the thing that drives me a little bit nutty
about all this, the Citibank, one Saturday morning,
early in the Obama administration,
they march into the offices at Citibank
and Citi says we're in really deep trouble.
The government says, "All right, we'll guarantee
"$300 billion of your assets."
Problem solved.
The bond holders of Citi didn't take any losses on that.
They were completely, fully compensated.
If I'm a bond holder in a company, I'm taking a risk.
And since I'm the bond holder, I'm the senior risk, right?
So I get paid first, the equity people,
people holding the shares, they get wiped out, right?
In a normal default process.
Nobody had to take any pain.
So we marched in with federal tax-payer dollars,
and we protected all the bond holders
and all the equity holders of Citi,
and what we really should have done is said,
"Very sorry for your losses,
"next time do your due diligence,
"please do not invest in companies
"that are run this poorly, and let's all move on."
But we're not gonna get the learning from that,
and we didn't allow the debt defaults to happen.
So what's really happened instead is we've taken
all the future economic pain that exists around Citibank,
for example, and we've just passed that to future taxpayers.
It didn't go away.
It's still sitting there.
The debts are just as ruinous as they were
before the guarantees happened,
and we're just gonna bleed that pain off slowly over time.
And we are talking about bleeding.
On your site I was reading
that the average family of four
is associated with three-quarters
of a million dollars in debt.
And that number may have increased since that was written,
because that could've been a year or so ago, right?
Mm-hmm.
So that, we could be inching up
towards 800, $900,000 per family of four.
It's probably
In associated debt.
Let's call it three-quarters of a million.
It's pretty close to that.
Okay, three-quarters
of a million, all right?
And what's disturbing, I mean,
there's a lot that's disturbing about that.
It's never gonna be paid back.
We think of what we saddled our children
and their children with which is just,
it makes you well up in tears,
it's so unconscionable.
And this sentence really got me.
It said, "Debt is a claim on future human labor."
Mm-hmm.
Now that's depressing for you.
Well, that's the way I look at it.
There's a number of text book definitions of money,
well, it's a unit of account.
No, but that makes sense.
That seems real.
But it is, it's a claim on labor.
It's a claim on the future.
So the more debt that we're piling up,
and this is a really critical point.
This is actually, this to me,
is the nut of the whole argument,
for why I believe the future has some real challenges on it.
We have been increasing our levels of debt exponentially
ever since the early 80s, it started to take off again.
And so, I don't know what happened back there,
but something happened.
Some national psyche changed,
maybe it started with Reagan saying deficits don't matter,
or something happened but,
and this is all across all of society.
So, I'm not saying this is a government issue.
But it's all governments, state, federal, local,
it's corporations, it's people.
So we started this massive experiment with debt
and it started increasing exponentially,
meaning there was three or four or five or 10% more
every single year and it just kept
going and going and going,
but when you have debt increasing like that,
you have an implicit assumption that the future
is gonna be larger than the past.
'Cause the way that debt gets paid off
is by our productive efforts in the future.
So when we're increasing this,
we're trusting that the future's increasing
right along with it.
And the problem with this story comes in
if you can find anything in that tale that suggests
that the future can't be as large as it needs to be
to pay off this debt today.
If that's the case, then the debt today
is already worthless, we have to discount it,
we have to imagine that some of it is going to go away.
But, more importantly, it means that that process
of the ever increasing debts like this,
that that has to stop,
because sooner or later,
you've just got to come to the conclusion,
you've got to admit, we can't continually increase this
Because we know that the future can't support that.
And we're at that moment.
It's not widely recognized where we're at the moment
where the style of life, the standard of living,
the ways in which we organized ourselves
that was based on constantly increasing our debt loads
has come to an end.
And that was built in.
That was the system we were rendering.
Right or wrong, that's the system
that we've been functioning with.
And now it's over.
It can't be sustained.
And all systems have pros and cons.
I'm not here to say, look back and that was horrible.
It wasn't.
We had some tremendous technological advances,
and we had some cultural advances,
and people lived wonderful lives,
but that has changed.
The circumstances by which that organization worked
have shifted, and that doesn't work anymore.
And that's what people, I suspect now, are starting to feel
in my work, I encounter a lot of people who kind of get it.
Either they get it, or they get it.
But one way or another, they understand
that something has changed.
And some people perceive that as things have broken,
and it feels bad to them, and other people feel
the opportunity and say, "Oh, no, no, no,
"this is just different now,
"something different has happened."
And it's a different future.
So the way I look at it, is this crisis, right,
that we're in right now, is actually just a transformation.
And how you view it depends on
how you're gonna respond to it.
This has got enormous opportunity wrapped in it,
but it's also, if you don't see it right,
it's got enormous crisis wrapped in it.
And a lot of people it's just changed,
it's big change, and I understand change is unsettling,
it really is, it's uncertain,
and a lot of people don't like uncertainty, myself included,
but this is a moment of transformation,
and I'm really actually quite positive
about a lot of things that will come to those
who can see this in time,
who will be able to take care of themselves,
who will be in a position to help others.
We're gonna redefine our jobs,
what's important to us, the things we value,
our priorities, individually and nationally,
all these things are up for grabs now.
So, I think that's an exciting time to be alive.
I was just gonna say, I do too.
I don't feel depressed about what's to come
for the exact same reason.
This is a fundamental shift
that I feel will help us
regain our humanity on many levels,
instead of staying on this debt mill
where we don't even own our own hours
or our own thoughts anymore,
because we're so exhausted just trying to pay off the debt.
A crisis is a terrible thing to waste.
Yeah, exactly,
a crisis is a terrible thing to waste.
We should sit down,
I mean, wouldn't this be great, to let's just stop
for a minute and let's run down the check list:
number of people in prison,
levels of obesity, workplace violence,
school standings relative internationally,
there's all kinds of things we can put
on our cultural check list and say,
"How're we doing, you know?"
Mm, what a D?
Didn't we come up with D on one of those lists?
Our national infrastructure, you know,
where are we on these things?
So, there's a lot of things we could,
I hopefully, you know, would come to the conclusion
and say, "We could fix a lot of these things."
And to do that, though, you have to diagnose it right,
you know, if the patient just had a heart attack
and you diagnose it that he needs extra tubs of grease,
you know, maybe you haven't got it right.
You know, so if we could diagnose this right,
I think that the problem is debt, too much debt.
We became addicted to debt, we used it,
we used it badly, we mismanaged it,
it went to all kinds of misallocations, the capital,
we wasted a lot of money,
we squandered a lot of opportunity,
but that's all past.
The question that only should concern anybody
is here we are today with these resources,
where do we want to go?
Where do we want to go
versus where do the ones who helped us create this
this, none of this was a surprise
from what I'm understanding.
That the ratio of debt to the ratio of income
started forking off about 10 years ago
and the Fed was fully aware that we were headed for trouble.
The debt was really on the rise.
It's starting to go out of control.
And they gave us these cheap interest rates, you know,
this subprime and everything else.
I don't know what they were doing there.
They have 350 Ph.D. columnists on staff.
They write all kinds of gobs of papers,
they have all this information.
I don't know what they were looking at.
I guess what happened was is they had drank
their own Kool-Aid and decided that,
and confused, I should say,
they confused rising asset prices with wealth.
They said, "Houses are going up,
"people are getting wealthier."
It's not true.
Wealth comes from productive enterprise
where value is created.
If you can sit in your house on your sofa drinking beer
and get wealthy, it should tell you
that something is wrong with the picture.
And a lot of people thought
that's what was happening.
And in fact, a lot of people took a second job
as a real estate agent so that they could start
snapping up properties and rehabbing and selling,
flipping the houses, as it were.
Wealth does not happen by magic or accident,
wealth happens because of hard work,
and anytime you're in a system where it looks
like wealth is coming out of nowhere,
you're in a bubble.
And so, now what happens?
Now we're looking at the housing bubble
that has only begun to play out.
Mm-hmm.
Now what?
Well, in housing, I still think we've got
a quite a bit of downside left at this point in time.
We have way too many houses,
there's a lot of shadow inventory
sitting on the banks' books
that they haven't disposed of yet.
We built way too many houses,
and so it's just gonna take time
for population to move into and inhabit those houses.
And frankly, houses are still way overpriced
compared to incomes in a lot of areas.
Not all areas, there's plenty of areas in the country
which are reasonably balanced,
but quite a few of the metropolitan areas
and the areas that ran the hardest
are still badly overpriced relative to incomes.
And so, one of two things happens:
either incomes come up or house prices come down.
Incomes aren't going anywhere.
So that only leaves one player,
the house prices are gonna come down.
And you think they're gonna drop for,
as many as four, five, six more years?
Something like that?
Well, if it's a normal bubble burst,
it means it's gonna take about as long to burst
as it took to inflate.
So that means if we tag,
it depends on where you start this one.
I start it in 1998, roughly,
peaked in 2006, so I think there's about eight years,
so, yeah, I think we've got about 2014,
somewhere in that zone, would be a reasonable guess.
Of course it could go faster,
and it's not going faster because what we've done
is the government has stepped in and bought mortgages,
about a trillion and a quarter when they're done,
and that's driven mortgage interest rates down,
which helps support the price, right?
If the mortgage rate is lower, people can pay more.
And there's been an $8,000 tax credit that ran
through December and then got extended.
So these are all efforts
to sort of keep house prices inflated up.
And what that will do is serve to sort of extend
the time it'll take to wash this out.
But I haven't found any examples of any bubbles
that have not run their course yet in history.
Maybe this will be the first time,
but I think that's, you know,
that's a terrible investment strategy.
Whenever somebody tells you,
"This time it's gonna be different,"
you know, just run.
Just run, yeah,
because what I love about your crash course
is everything's right there.
You have it all in graphs, so you can,
it's emblazoned on the brain
what these patterns look like,
and these bubble patterns look like.
And every single one of them looks pretty much the same.
I mean it's actually geometrically quite perfect in a sense.
That beautiful symmetry on them.
Beautiful symmetry.
And what this symmetry reveals is
that financial bubbles and panics,
they're sociological events.
They're not financial events.
They're not sophisticated outcomes
of machines and logical thinking, it's people.
It's people getting overly excited on one end,
and getting overly unexcited on the other end.
And this has been true for hundreds of years.
And so there's nothing different about humans today
than couple hundred years ago, we're just the same,
programmed the same, operate the same.
And so I don't have anything in the data set at this point
that would suggest to me this bubble burst
is going to be any different.
What's a little bit different this time
is we're fighting it with a global armamentarium
of free money, in essence, all the worlds' central banks
have locked elbows and they're singing Kumbaya
and they're hoping
that they're gonna pull us out of this one.
I have my doubts because all of history says
that when you try and control an economy
at the central level using big ugly levers,
more money, cheaper, you know,
these are just giant, blunt levers,
they really don't have a good track record of working.
And this is the thing that's most amazing to me,
we have all these people who've seen,
this is called Keynsian Monetary Philosophy,
so the Keynes came to us, you know,
the British economist in the 20s
and the Keynesians truly believe
that they can fix it this time,
if only we do it better, quicker, more completely.
We stopped to early last time.
They have this whole litany of excuses
for why they failed in the past,
but they never stopped to look back
and say, "We're batting zero."
Right.
Maybe the philosophy is wrong.
Maybe it's not that we applied it wrong, right?
It's almost as if we have a doctor
that's killed every single patient they've ever seen.
(Regina laughs)
Well, I just put,
I'm just gonna put the needle in somewhere else next time.
You know, just say, stop.
Just stop.
(laughs) Okay, so let's talk
about some of the people that are bloodied
in the streets, some of the women and men
in this country who are now just working
their tushes off to try to keep up with it.
Maybe they got caught in the mortgage thing,
maybe their mortgage is now double or triple
what they were a year or two ago.
Let's say their credit cards have been jacked up
maybe to 30% from a starting point of 12 or 13.
And there aren't enough hours in the day
to keep the gig going anymore.
What do you see happening?
And I'm not asking you to give advice per se,
but what really are the options?
I mean, where do you just say, "I can't do it,
"I'm going to have to let go of something."
Looking at it on the large scale,
where does a person first just let go,
because they can't do it?
Hm.
That's a great question.
I have a lot of experience in this,
because my family and I took a very interesting turn
in our lives based on this information
that's in the crash course.
I would advise anybody, just go watch that,
it's more material than I could possibly
ever sit down and articulate.
That's the reason I created it,
because I was tired of having
these same conversations poorly.
Right, well done.
It's hard to string it all together
in open conversation.
So based on that information, though,
my wife and I sat down, we looked at everything,
we said, we have to fundamentally change our lives,
so the before story, before I came into contact
with this information, I'm a vice president of a company
called SCIC, it's very large.
I've got a five-bathroom house on the coast of Connecticut,
three young children, I'm 42 at the time
I come to this conclusion.
I got a boat in the slip, it's got two engines on it, right?
You're living the dream, yes you are.
I'm living the dream, right?
Okay, now fast forward five years later
after I came into contact with this information,
we were renting a small house in rural Massachusetts,
I don't have a boat in the slip anymore,
I got a kayak with, you know, double paddle,
so twin engines to double paddle, is my journey.
We've taken our kids out of school,
and we're home schooling them at this point,
because the kinds of adjectives
by which we want to describe our children
were not the ones that public school in our area
was creating, and we want creative,
independent, adaptable individuals.
People that still have sovereign minds
when they grow up.
Absolutely, the answers come from here,
not the front of the room.
And so we made all of those changes.
And when I stepped off that particular train
at that point in time, I had nothing in front of me.
I did not quit my job as a vice president,
saying, "And I know what I'm gonna do next."
I had no idea.
My situation's different, I guess,
because I had a very supportive wife,
and we were in alignment on these things,
and I recognize that not everybody has that.
I had some savings, because I have always been a saver,
and I believed in that.
So we had a cushion to operate with for a while,
but really it was a big step off into the unknown.
So here's the summation.
We cut our standard of living in half
by conventional standards.
But our quality of life doubled.
Talk about that part.
Well, what I found out is that
the dream I was living was really an illusion.
I was working really hard.
I was gone all the time.
I was, in my job, I was on a plane
from Monday to Thursday every week.
And then I was always working when I got home anyway.
So I was really missing out on life.
You know, I was very successful at what I did at work,
but, not, maybe, successful in being around my kids
watching them grow up.
So here I am, now, have tons of time to spend with my kids,
because I don't have all this stuff that I have to maintain.
I don't have to work that hard, 'cause I have
a lot less things that I really have to attend to,
from a material standpoint.
We made a conscious effort to move in community,
and find community with the understanding
that we wanted to be in deep relationship
with people, because whatever future comes,
it's good to know people really deeply.
So we wanted to share experiences
with people that would go well beyond
the normal chatter at parties and things like that.
And so we found, we picked up and moved.
This was my wife's genius moment.
She said, "Let's go to a place which already has stuff
"like this, rather than trying to create it
"where we were living."
'Cause where we lived
was a suburban sterile bedroom community.
And we looked around and said,
"I don't know how to do this."
So, and it's not here, so we moved to where it was,
and best decision ever.
And so now we have a really tight circle of friends
and it's growing all the time.
We live in a house which we ended up buying eventually,
which, can now, you know,
whatever happens with the energy situation,
it'll always be warm.
You know, we have five ways of heating the house
if we need to.
We can grow some of our own food.
We just found that we could start to be in relationship
with the things that we had formerly been
completely dependent on outside.
All of the systems, from energy to food,
to even medicine, to our entertainment,
we took all responsibility of bringing
all of these things back into our lives.
And I'll be honest with you,
we first started doing that out of fear.
We came at this originally saying,
"Oh my gosh, we feel exposed,
"this is the wrong community,
"we have to be somewhere else."
And there was fear on that.
But once we got there,
we realized there was this huge carrot,
that we didn't even know was there.
It was hidden from us.
Oh, yeah, it's just wonderful.
How did we miss this?
So much more satisfying a lifestyle.
Absolutely, absolutely.
So we know that this is possible,
that you can really reduce your standard of living
and come out better.
But the things that you care about have to shift
and what your values are have to shift,
and that takes time.
I've been on this journey for five years now,
and I don't know how to tell anybody
how to speed it up.
I wish I'd learned a lot of things where I could say,
"I can tell you how to do this in two months."
'Cause it just takes time, it really does.
It's a process.
Just to get, just to get control of your finances.
There's a whole body of work there.
Let's imagine you got a 401(k) over here,
you've got a broker over there,
and you've got a couple of accounts,
maybe there's an annuity, and then there's an inheritance.
Just to get all of that assembled
and get your arms around it so you're in control of it,
it just takes time.
you wouldn't believe the rules that exist
to prevent you from getting access to your money.
Mm-hmm.
So financially, there might be a bunch of steps to take
just to control it, and then to figure out
how to cut your expenses,
and then there's, you know, that takes time.
Physically, if you're gonna move and start a garden
or, you know, gain some skills or all of these other things,
it just takes time.
And then emotionally.
That's the last area where it just takes time
to sort of cleave the sense of knowing
how the future is gonna be.
Like, my daughter's gonna go to the same college
I went to and have the same opportunities.
But maybe not.
And that's okay, she might have better opportunities,
but I had a sense that I knew what it was gonna look like,
and letting go of that sense,
it just took time.
And so, all of these things, and to anybody I counsel,
get started, there's no time like the present,
these changes are coming, I'm just so convinced
that big changes are coming.
So start to figure out what are the things
that you can do to add
greater resilience into your life, today?
And that's a different answer for everybody.
And what about for people
who haven't really taken all these things
into consideration, and are now being whipped around
by the effect of what's going on
economically at large, and are not really
in a power position and don't have any 401(k) anymore?
And now we're looking at losing our credit rating
because we have to bail on something, right?
How's that work?
I wish there was an easy answer for that,
and there really isn't at this point in time.
The key understanding for me is
that the failing here is in our monetary system.
It's in the active process of no longer serving us.
We are now in service to our monetary system,
our debt structure.
And that story is starting to break down,
and that's a deeply unsettling time,
and the transition between the system functioning
and not functioning is really gonna be unstable,
possibly unpleasant, and the only thing
that I have found that makes sense to me
is to start disconnecting from the system,
from the money system itself,
and connecting with the people system.
So what happens?
Does that mean, I mean, in some cases
people will have to walk away from debts
that they can no longer service
and then the credit's gone,
their potential for credit's gone.
That's a business decision.
Businesses do that all the time.
I really reject the notion where I see it painted
all the time where they're trying to say it's a moral,
you have a moral obligation to pay your mortgage back.
No, it's a contract, it's a business decision.
It's all stipulated.
There's language in there, if there was a clause in there
that said, you have a moral obligation to pay,
I would change my tune, but there isn't.
It's just business, and businesses do it all the time.
We're in San Francisco now, well,
Morgan Stanley walked away from a gigantic, you know,
building that they had.
Morgan Stanley, they could pay.
They said, "It doesn't make sense."
So they didn't.
They terminated the--
And yet the average person beats themselves up
thinking, "Well, I did charge those things,
"but now my card's up to 15,000
"and they've ratcheted the rate up,
"I can't take it anymore,
"I can't pay it, I don't have the money
"or else I can't pay my heat,
"or my heating bill, or electric bill, or whatnot."
So this whole thing where we really come down hard
on ourselves as individuals in terms of the morality
and ethics of money, debt, and obligation,
that's very interesting what you said,
"This is a business decision."
Well, it is.
I would also, let me give a little bit of counsel,
that is people are running up debts
and know that they're living beyond their means,
that always ends in tears.
Yes.
Everybody should endeavor to live within their means,
whatever those are.
And so, that's, that actually makes sense,
but sometimes circumstances happen.
You know, if you moved out here,
and you had to buy a house for a variety of reasons,
and they just happened to have been in bubble territory,
because of Federal Reserve policies,
and you got caught on that,
now you're facing a business decision, right?
Yeah.
But if you're MO is to go out and constantly spend more
than you earn, that's different.
Back to morals and ethics.
Then you're certainly on the border of territory.
Your border territory, I don't think is very wise,
for personal, like if I was going to personally coach
somebody who was spending beyond their means,
I'd say, "Stop," you know, just don't.
Don't do that.
Now, let's get into an area
that is a lot of people have their eye on
for a variety of reasons,
I mean, headlines recently,
or Google threatens to pull out of China,
and China's rattling their sabers,
and there's a lot of upset, no one really knows
what this will mean in the markets and such.
But let's talk about the year of the tiger,
you wrote a blog on it.
Coming into the year of the tiger
and the relationship between China
and the rest of the world,
and some of what they're doing there
to prepare for their future where other parts
of the world are dropping the ball.
Absolutely this is a huge story.
What I am, I'm an information scout.
That's how I think of myself.
And I go out there and I sniff around,
and I find something of interest,
and I'll start gathering more of them,
and it, a couple weeks back, I realized I had
this huge basket of nuts, and they all said China on them.
And I started looking, and I was like,
"Ooh, what's going on here?"
So, as you know, if you watch the crash course,
I have this belief that we're running out of a couple
of key resources, that this, I'm gonna be alive
during one of the most critical transformations
in all of humanity which will be the first time ever
in human existence collectively, across the globe,
we're gonna have slightly less
of some resources going forward, not more,
oil being the chief one.
But once you go past peak oil, you're at peak everything
at that point, because we use oil to extract copper
and move the bauxite around
and get the ore for iron and everything.
So, I'm watching this story of peak oil coming really fast
and wondering if I was in charge, like if I was
in charge of the U.S. right now, I'd be on a crash program
of both hoarding resources, accumulating them,
and saving them up, and acquiring them.
Because I want my nation to have that security,
because you need resources to have an economy,
not the other way around.
Well, when I started looking at this basket
with all the China nuts in it, I realized that
all of them said some version of China is taking
its checkbook and going across the world.
I have stories about China buying oil rights in Canada,
timber rights in Canada, all sorts of grains out of Brazil,
a huge oil deal with Venezuela,
land in Africa for agriculture,
they're doing all kinds of ordeals in Africa,
they're basically all over the globe
running a mercantilist policy with their checkbook
of just buying this stuff.
And they're thinking huge deals.
They're giant in their long-term.
They did a 25-year gas deal with Iran,
a big, giant, multi-decade deal.
And when I look at that through one filter,
you could say, "Oh, this is just Chinese companies
"out competing, and maybe they're overpaying,
"haha, they're gonna have bad luck with that."
But it actually starts looking more like a state policy
of encouraging and allowing the businesses
that exist in China to go out and secure resources
and bring them back.
China doubled its imports of copper this year.
It can't be because they needed it economically.
The economy, in case you hadn't noticed, is tanking, right?
So China's exports have tanked,
but still they're importing ingots of copper
as fast as they possibly can.
This starts to look like a story of hoarding,
it starts to look like a story of a country
that understands that there's a resource limitation coming,
maybe not this quarter,
maybe not by the next election cycle in U.S. politics,
but certainly in the next decade.
And that's a good point.
We go as far as the next election cycle.
Well, yet, corporate, you know,
from a corporate standpoint, we ought to go
to the next earning statement, or the year annual statement,
or we go politically to the next election.
So we're on this really short, short cycle.
And China's on a longer cycle, right.
They don't actually hold elections,
so they are free to think in different ways.
And the Chinese Premiere is actually
incredibly well educated and an incredibly smart man,
and so all of these concepts are certainly well
within his capability to grasp.
So, when I look at this, it occurs to me
that it looks like China's already off of the racing blocks.
And the United States doesn't even know
that there's a race being run.
Yeah, yeah.
It would look like that.
Right, and maybe we've got a different strategy
but I think it's an old strategy.
Here's the old strategy:
We have more boats with missiles on them than you do,
so if we have to, we'll be able
to get access to your materials.
That's so primitive, really.
Well, it is primitive,
but the problem is that most of these things now,
like, consider oil.
So here we are, we're saber rattling
with both Yemen and with Iran, and of course,
we've already been in Afghanistan, and Iraq,
and Kazakhstan, so we've basically got
the whole region surrounded.
There's oil under every terrorist, magically.
And, so what that's gonna translate into
is we think that we're gonna have access to that oil
because we've got the boats.
Well, that might be true, but the problem is
that that oil has to get to us by boat.
We put it in these big, giant tankers,
and they start trundling along at about four knots,
and in case you hadn't noticed, that's really slow.
These things are explosive.
And to try and protect
a 12,000-mile shipping line
from random acts of violence, terrorists,
let alone state-sponsored warfare is impossible,
because offense is so much cheaper to run
than defense on these things.
Remember, you know, even in the Falklands War,
what was that '82 between Britain and Argentina,
there were these French Exocet missiles
that just created huge enormous troubles
for the British navy.
That was in 1982, things have gone way beyond that now.
So, it just says that I don't strategically,
if I'm looking at this, I don't think it makes sense
to count on the fact that we're gonna be able
to protect oil shipments
from the Middle East using violent means.
And China has come to that same,
first of all, they have a land bridge to that,
so that's a different story for them.
But they're using checkbooks
and we're using gunboats.
And between those two strategies right now,
I think one of them has a better chance of success,
and I'm really worried about the fact
that if we are relying on military
as the way that we're gonna preserve and protect,
we need, we might find ourselves pretty badly disappointed
at some point in the future with that.
Um, yeah, it would seem
we're, that we're not,
well we've never been known
for our long-term thinking anyway.
I mean, even just looking at the savings stats
of China, the Chinese population in general.
Here we like to sit and point fingers
because we're in a sense,
we've got a little sour grapes thing going on
between the East and the West, no doubt about it.
But the reality is you're talking about a population
of people that knows how to think long-term,
a government that thinks long-term,
people that are willing to sacrifice now,
some pleasures of now for the future,
and their savings are what, 30%?
And have historically been around 30%
compared to in the good days, 10% in the West.
And now we're at, what, minus 10%?
It's really, we were most recently at,
they said, four or 5%, but we went
as low as 1/2%.
But once you look at how we count savings,
it's actually a lot less than that.
Yeah, yeah.
A little fudging going on there.
So China's preparing for their future.
And we think that we can do it by might still?
That's a sad commentary.
Well, I understand how these things sort of develop.
It's not just us, I think we've got all of NATO
is kind of pursuing the same strategy at this point.
It's still not a good strategy.
I've asked eight people recently
why are we in Afghanistan?
And without, once you take the resource war possibility
out of the picture, nobody can explain why we're there.
You know, there's no real clear reason,
but once you start to look at
where the resources are concentrated,
and you look at where U.S. troops are concentrated,
the story becomes absolutely crystal clear.
Or at least there's enough correlation there
that there's smoke all over the story.
It's pretty impressive.
Pretty obvious, yeah.
Okay, so I just wanted to address that,
you know, the year of the tiger, I like that.
But I wanted to address what is happening
in the East so that we can understand it
from a perhaps a little more fair point of view
than what the media is generally portraying
in creating that animosity and resentment and so forth.
No, you have some people handling things
in a smarter way than we are.
I mean, that's what it looks like to me.
So let's talk about smart.
What, at this stage of the game,
what could be done?
What can be done to create a different kind
of economic model in the West?
Is it too late?
I mean obviously we have to go through some
of the pain here, because we've created it.
But what's possible still?
Well, what's possible is everything.
We've got all the resources, all the talent,
will power, we have everything we need.
We have a failing in our money system at this point in time.
I'll be honest with you, I don't think there are many ways
that we can resurrect or recover the U.S. dollar itself
as a unit of currency.
I think it's a little too far gone.
But there are lots of other monetary systems
that we could implement.
And, you know, if we were gonna talk about
how would we actually do that?
I would suggest that what we do is we start
by standing up parallel currency systems.
And there's a lot of them out there.
There are mutual credit exchange systems,
there are time banks, there are demurrage.
I'm a real fan of demurrage.
I don't know about demurrage.
Demurrage is,
so there was a small town
in Europe that, right after the war I believe it was,
they were just ruined.
And they didn't have any money.
So the mayor of the town created a money system
where the town handed out money
but demurrage money has this really interesting feature.
You have to go,
it has little boxes on it in the system they used,
and you have to go get a stamp put in that box
or it becomes worthless.
Every time it gets a stamp on it,
it's worth a little bit less.
So it's money, the longer you hold on to it,
the less valuable it becomes.
So, people, when you get it,
you don't hoard it anymore.
It creates this incentive to like,
"Oh my gosh, I gotta go use this."
Right?
And so it's like reverse inflation, if you will.
Interesting.
And it has all sorts of things that flow from that.
Here's the wonderful thing.
Money is an organizing concept.
That's all it is.
A paper dollar actually has nothing,
but it's a story, it has meaning between us
because we have assigned it some meaning.
And depending on which story you tell,
different outcomes happen.
You know, if it has a different plot line,
different enforces some things,
punishes others.
And demurrage money has a wonderful characteristic
of enforcing cooperation or creating incentives
for cooperation, of creating incentives
for keeping the money moving through a system,
and I think
if there's enough interesting elements to that story
that we should be trying it out.
Like I would, here's the thing.
I'm ultimately a scientist,
natural science was my background.
And I start to think of everything
kind of like, I think nature's kind of already got
the model for everything, right?
And since I can't find anything in nature
that grows exponentially forever,
I figure is probably a bad thing, a bad model.
There's no way to make it work
because nature hasn't figured out how to do it.
But one thing nature does is it's resilient
and it has lots and lots of competition.
Like for any bit of food out there,
tons of things are competing for it.
And it actually makes the system stronger not weaker.
We only have one money unit
that you can use in this country by law.
Well, what if we had two?
Wouldn't that be better?
Sort of like an ecosystem.
So this one, if this one's dry,
maybe this one's, you know, got rain falling on it,
and plus I would love what competition would bring
if the Federal Reserve now didn't just say,
"You all have to live with our decisions, ha, ha, ha."
But now had to entice me to use their product,
'cause that's all it is.
The Federal Reserve is just an organization
that has been licensed by law to have a cartel,
a monopoly over our money.
And so they have that.
And it's an enormous privilege.
But what if they had competition?
And so, again, you can ask a hundred people,
and no one would be able to give you an answer for this.
Why doesn't the treasury just print money
all by itself and hand it out?
Why do we borrow money as a nation,
which is our national contract with each other,
why do we borrow that at interest from somebody?
And that question comes up a lot,
but the answer doesn't.
You're right.
The answer does not.
Hard to come by the answer.
But doesn't the answer,
is it that the answer really can't emerge
as long as you have these close bed fellow relationships
between the government and the Federal Reserve?
The problem is that
that answer, if we did move
to the Treasury issuing its own money,
it would destroy a lot of the power base
of a lot of very powerful institutions and people.
So I understand there's an issue.
That's the answer.
There's the problem.
But there's no good economic reason why.
There's no fundamental or philosophical reason why.
There's potentially a power-based reason why,
but there's no other good answer for that.
So that would be my first step.
If I was in charge, like Obama says, "Do something,"
I would say, "Great, start issuing actual U.S. money.
"And put a lot of rules around it
"and make sure that we can't go down the same path
"of just printing scrillions of them.
"Make sure that it's tied to something,
"that when this money goes out,
"it's actually tied to economic output or development,
"or this money can only be used for certain things
"like infrastructure projects, or investing in R and D
"or something, just find some way of making
"that money go out and do things for our country."
And then all of a sudden, you know, people would have
the opportunity would you rather receive one of these
in payment or one of these?
And that's where the market gets to start to vote
and it creates competition.
It's important signals come back to the
head organization about how they're operating
and what they're doing and whether the people
believe in it or not, all of that.
And then I would also allow multiple local currency systems
to stand up, because the national currency system
means that me living in Massachusetts
and you living in California, we are going to be subject
to the same whims and vagaries and conditions
that our currency is under regardless of whether
one region is experiencing
fundamentally different conditions from another.
So, local currencies can start to account
for the regional differences.
If this area has a lot more growth
and is a lot more exciting, maybe it should have
a different interest rate than we do over there.
And so on and so forth.
So, I would love to see an ecosystem
of currencies stand up.
And they can be all different ones
and not all of them are gonna be dollar based,
and many of them aren't gonna be interest based.
And some of them won't even have a concept
of debt associated with them at all.
And so this would be just very exciting.
And that's, we're gonna have to go there,
because our money system is enforcing exponential growth,
we know that we're not gonna be able to do that forever,
ergo, our money system breaks.
Right.
So if we know that, let's get started,
let's get busy.
Okay, so what happens
if we don't make preemptive measures,
take such preemptive measures
to start creating these systems
to replace the existing system?
If we don't do that, we just sustain the unsustainable,
and preserve the status quo at any cost,
what's gonna happen is we're gonna overproduce
our currency, which we are doing by the bale
at this point in time, and that's gonna get us
into a position where the currency is ultimately gonna fail.
As we talked about
in the very beginning of the interview,
it took 300 years to create the first trillion,
it's now down to four months,
we can get down to four weeks,
we can get down to four days.
I've told you that there is 3,800 paper currencies
that have failed.
It could be 3,801.
There's no reason why our paper currency
is any different from any of the others
that have ever existed before and gone up in flames.
Yes, we're the world reserve currency,
yes, it's the United States,
yes, some things are different,
but let's be very clear about this.
Our dollar is not several hundred years old.
It's 39 years old.
August 15, 1971, with the abandonment
of the international gold standard,
we went to an all new type of a currency.
We went to a floating exchange rate,
debt-based fiat money system.
It's a mouthful, but that's what happened.
So we're only about call it almost 40 years
into this particular experiment.
Now, that's about how long paper currencies
have lasted historically.
Because they all get into the same trouble
for the same reasons, and it's just a human story.
It's not a finance story.
Finance makes it sound like it's scientific
or math-based or something, and it's not.
It's just a human story.
And if you understand how it was
that the denarius in Roman times got debased
from 95% purity to 0.02%.
Imagine that in Roman times, they figured out
how to electroplate silver onto lead slugs.
That's awesome, they didn't even have electricity,
and they figured out how to do that.
High marks, right?
Wow, and necessity is
the mother of invention, they say.
It was fabulous.
Well, greed is, anyway.
Yeah, so, listen, our currency is not that old,
so this is, you know, it would be a mistake
to think, well we have very intelligent people,
it's a sophisticated system, it's I can't understand it,
so I'll just trust that they're gonna be running it well.
And the truth of the matter is, I don't think
they really understand what they're doing.
Ben Bernake has displayed,
he was our current Federal Reserve Chairman,
and we'll see how long that lasts.
He has displayed absolutely no understanding
of the basic, fundamental issues
that have been going on.
2007, he said we didn't have a housing bubble.
Right.
He didn't see the crisis coming.
He's fundamentally out of tune with what's going on.
So, I just think everybody's got
to look at these issues for themselves,
start to trust themselves,
educate themselves, 'cause this is no longer,
we've abdicated the responsibility out and trusted,
it's time to reel it back in, take the responsibility back,
understand what's going on,
and be aware that there's a very, very high possibility
that our current monetary system will expire,
an untimely death, it'll be a timely one,
some time in the next five, 10, 20 years.
It's a chance, it's a very high chance.
So education is really key
and you've provided a wonderful venue for that.
And people can log on and they can take
this crash course, they can do the crash course free,
right, I mean, it's just,
but you have a newsletter, you have blogs
that you write as well, so people can also help
support the work you do, and also be privy to some
pretty cool information on the inside, too.
Because your, I'd just say,
you're filling that basket of nuts all the time
with new kernels of information.
I'm scouting all the time, and there's just so much
going on, it's almost,
two years ago, I could keep up with everything,
now I can't keep up with everything anymore,
it's amazing how much is going on right now.
Yeah.
Well, on that note, we'll encourage everybody
to go to your site, and do the crash course,
and find out essentially the backdrop
to this whole story, so we can make
more intelligent decisions and take the power back,
as you'd say.
And let's hope we get creative sooner than later.
Let's hope.
Thank you, Chris.
Thank you.
You can go to chrismartenson.com,
and that's Martenson with an O,
M-A-R-T-E-N-S-O-N,
to take the crash course,
or to become a member of the site
for regular updates.
I highly recommend it.
Meanwhile, you might also enjoy
our other interviews on alternative eonomics
with Ellen Brown, Tom Greco, and Stephen Erarick.
We also post regular articles from Ellen Brown
in our World section of our site.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(upbeat techno music)